# Lab 2: Set Covering via Genetic Algorithm

## Info for the Reader

Group members:

- Sergiu Abed (s295149)

- Luca Balduzzi (s303326)

- Riccardo Musumarra (s295103)

Main files on which the code has been developed: 

- set_covering_genetic.py

## Task

Given a number $N$ and some lists of integers $P = (L_0, L_1, L_2, ..., L_n)$,
determine, if possible, $S = (L_{s_0}, L_{s_1}, L_{s_2}, ..., L_{s_n})$
such that each number between $0$ and $N-1$ appears in at least one list

$$\forall n \in [0, N-1] \ \exists i : n \in L_{s_i}$$

and that the total numbers of elements in all $L_{s_i}$ is minimum.

## Approach

The solution is based on a genetic algorithm using strategy 2 (as called by the professor in the slides), in which the offspring are put together with the population (note that the offspring are not introduced in the population until all the offspring have been generated) and then the best individuals among the current population plus the offspring are chosen for the next generation. In short, we are using ($\mu + $\lambda) strategy.

An offspring is generated by one of the two genetic operators: mutation and recombination.

## Terminology

    - gene = list in the list of lists generated by "problem()"
    - genome = list of genes
    - individual = conceptually, it is a representation of a genome with some extra information (set of covered elements w/o repetitions, weight, fitness)
    - weight = nr of elements covered by considering the repetitions
    - fittness = -weight
    - locus = index within a genome
    - allele = a possible gene that can occupy a certain locus

## Parent selection

Based on tournament approach. Here, we used a tournament of size 2. As explained in class, the higher tournament size, the higher selective pressure.

## Genetic operators

### Mutation

Randomly select a locus within the genome of the individual to be mutated and an allele to replace the gene on that locus.
The mutation function implemented here may produce individuals that are not solutions to the Set Covering problem. They are discarded during the execution of the evolution function.

### Recombination

It takes as input two parents, splits their genomes and combines them to form a new individual.
As with mutation, the individuals that are not solutions are discarded during evolution.

## Fitness

We considered fitness to be minus the weight, so the smaller is the weight of an individual, the fitter it is.

## Survival selection

The fittest $\mu individuals are selected for the population of the next generation.

## Generation

Offspring are generated either through mutation or recombination. The choice is done randomly. The parents are chosen through tournaments.
Once the parents and the genetic operator are chosen, the operator is applied on the parent(s) until a correct solution is produced.
Once the offspring generation is over, they are put in the population and survival selection is performed.

## Results

- N = 5, W = 5

- N = 10, W = 10

- N = 20, W = 24

- N = 50, W = 83

- N = 100, W = 207

- N = 500, W = 1625

- N = 1000, W = 3693

- N = 5000, W = 25516

### Sources

- Giovanni Squillero's Github Computational Intelligence

- one-max.ipynb

- Giovanni Squillero's Slides of the course Computational Intelligence 2022/2023
